---
layout: post
title:  "M571 retro PC"
date:   2016-05-13 20:08:00
categories: posts
redirect_from: "/posts/2016/05/13/i-bought-old-junk-pc/"
---

I bought an old junk PC from a scrap collector on the street.
I did it for nostalgic reasons, it reminds me my first PC.

A few days ago I went out to buy lunch and on my way I saw a truck full of old junk computers, printers and CRT monitors.
On an impulse, I spoke to driver and offered 10$ for the PC that looked least damaged.
It was in a baby-AT case, so I knew we're talking 1994-1996 era.
I took it home and tried to start it, but it didn't work.
It would spin CPU fan and turn all the lights on (power, turbo, hdd), but it would not react to keyboard input, nor would it output anything to monitor or produce any beep codes if I pulled memory.
After a few minutes of trying to make it run it started smelling of mold.
I took it apart and left pieces out on the balcony under direct sunlight.
After 6 hours of baking, I hooked up motherboard to a known good power supply and it booted to post screen!

I only found "Elpina" and "BA E-VO" in silk screen.
This was enough to find a [forum post](https://www.wimsbios.com/forum/where-can-find-motherboard-manual-f34/manual-for-elpina-9814-t5742.html) about it being a relabeled PCChips M571 motherboard.
In late 90-s to early 2000-s, PCChips was a very prolific motherboard vendor.
It was offering very cheap prices and their motherboards sort of worked, but not very well.
I did search online and found a couple of very comprehensive support sites for M571: [m571.com](http://m571.com/m571/) and [cwcyrix](http://cwcyrix.duckdns.org/techpage/html/m1.html).
Thanks a lot to people who created and maintain those pages!
If it wasn't for them, I'd give up and just desolder power, SIMM-72 and battery sockets and recycle the rest.
Apparently there are 3 main versions of this motherboard.
Version 1.x have 4 ISA slots and no on-board sound.
Versions 3.2 and 7.x have 3 ISA slots and on-board [C-Media CMI8330A](https://www.vogonsdrivers.com/index.php?catid=55) sound chip.
Version 3.2A and 7.x support 2.2v core voltage for AMD K6-2+/K6-III CPUs, and it's clearly marked with a black dot next to 2.2v jumper.
Versions 1.x and 3.2, same jumper is clearly labeled as 2.5v.
This let me to believe I got version 3.2.

Once I booted, the CPU was mis-identified.
It is a Pentium MMX 200MHz, configured as 66MHz FSB and 3x multiplier.
It was showing 225, 250 or 266 randomly on each boot.
Surprisingly this got temporarily fixed once I switched from on-board VGA to Diamond Stealth 2000 PCI VGA card with 4MB (S3 Virge 325, BIOS v1.2).
It was showing correct Pentium MMX 200, but later switched to 233 on it's own. I didn't find root cause for this yet.
I replaced 32MB DIMM it had with two speedy 64MB DIMMs for a total of 128MB of RAM.
After this it finally booted to Windows 98 that was on the 2GB hard drive it came with.

This PC belonged to a Tamil christian church, was last used around 2002 and had WordPerfect 9, Quattro Pro 9 and Corel Draw 7 on it.
It also had bloat in form of Norton Antivirus 2002 and AOL, so I did clean re-install of Windows 98 SE.
Floppy drive wouldn't accept floppy disks, so I had it replaced.
Later I disassembled it to find hair and a bunch of used long distance calling cards.
I cleaned floppy drive thoroughly, and it now works fine and is back in this PC.

I decided to update to a more recent version of BIOS.
I couldn't flash BIOS with amiflash 6.x that came from PCChips with BIOS file, it would just hang.
While looking for different versions of amiflash, I came across an amazing project: [UniFlash](http://www.rainbow-software.org/uniflash/).
This program worked beautifully, I took backup of BIOS that motherboard came with and upgraded to unofficial BIOS version 19990514S-J1.
It is based on last official BIOS version 19990514S from PCChips.
It unlocks a few performance settings, updates on-board VGA BIOS and adds AMD K6-2/K6-III support.

The one the motherboard came with was 19971120S.
It is older then any M571 3.2 BIOS versions I found online.
One of the things it doesn't do that later versions do well is booting from CD.
If anyone is curious to look at it, here is the file: [2016-05-13-m571-19971120S.zip](/files/2016-05-13-m571-19971120S.zip).

I'm kind of tired of this project for now, so I'll just put it on hold until I have some free time and willpower to continue.
Once I get back to it, I'd like to recap the board, add 2.2v voltage support and run it with AMD K6-2+ 366 CPU.
